A project funded by the Australian Government 

AIMhi Stay Strong 
Planning: 
Brief Treatment Manual 
Tricia Nagel, Kylie Dingwall 

Attributions Here 

V2.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Contents 

Acknowledgements ........................................................................................... 3 
Background ....................................................................................................... 4 
eMental Health in Practice ............................................................................. 4 
The AIMhi Theoretical Framework ................................................................. 4 
Key steps for the AIMhi Stay Strong approach .................................................. 6 
Rationale ........................................................................................................... 6 
 .......................................................................................................................... 7 
Using the Stay Strong Approach with clients ..................................................... 8 
Cultural context .............................................................................................. 8 
Rapport (good connection) ............................................................................ 9 
The Four Step Stay Strong Plan .................................................................... 9 
Step 1 and 2: Family and Strengths ............................................................. 10 
Step 3 and 4: Exploring Worries and Setting Goals ..................................... 11 
Setting goals for change .............................................................................. 11 
Risk Management ........................................................................................... 13 
Know early warning signs ............................................................................ 15 
Have a crisis plan ........................................................................................ 15 
Risk assessment .......................................................................................... 15 
Suicide risk assessment .............................................................................. 15 
Risk of harm to others .................................................................................. 16 
Complete your risk assessment ................................................................... 16 
Safe follow-up plans .................................................................................... 16 
Managing risk – Crisis Contacts .................................................................. 17 
24-Hour Telephone Counselling ...................................................................... 17 
Diagnosis of mental illness .............................................................................. 17 
Mental State Examination ............................................................................ 18 
Kessler 10 (K10) .......................................................................................... 19 
Additional information about mental illness .................................................. 20 
Cultural assessment and belief systems ......................................................... 20 
References ...................................................................................................... 21 
Appendix A: List of Digital Mental Health Resources ...................................... 22 
Appendix B: Practice Materials........................................................................ 28 
1.  Sample stories from Stay Strong Plans .................................................. 28 
2.  AIMHi Stay Strong App Motivational Care Planning - Adherence Scale . 29 
3.  Goal Setting Activities ............................................................................. 34 
4.  Example App Script ................................................................................ 38 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Acknowledgements 

We  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  generous  contributions  of  Aboriginal  Mental 
Health  Workers  on  the  Tiwi  Islands  and  in  Darwin,  and  of  many  health 
professionals  in  the  Northern  Territory  and  across  Australia  who  have  engaged 
with the AIMhi team and contributed their expertise to this story. In particular we 
acknowledge  AIMhi  Indigenous1  researchers  past  and  present,  especially 
Carolyn  Griffin,  Valerie  Thompson,  Jana  Mills,  John  Cusack  and  Daniel 
Mulholland.  

The  eMental  Health  in  Practice  (eMHPrac)  project  is  a  collaboration  between 
Menzies  School  of  Health  Research,  the  University  Centre  for  Rural  Health, 
Black Dog Institute and led by Queensland University of Technology. eMHPrac is 
funded  by  the  Australian  Government  as  part  of  the  National  eMental  Health 
Strategy.  

Suggested citation: Nagel, T., & Dingwall K. M. (2014). AIMhi Stay Strong planning: 
Brief treatment manual. Darwin: Menzies School of Health Research.  

1 Please note that when we mention the term ‘Indigenous’ we include all Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander people and acknowledge their rich traditions and heterogenous cultures 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Background 

Hello and welcome to Yarning about Mental Health and the AIMhi mental health 
research program. The AIMhi mental health team is based at Menzies School of 
Health Research. The AIMhi program of research began in 2003 and has worked 
collaboratively  with  Aboriginal  Mental  Health  Workers,  Aboriginal  and  Torres 
Strait Islander organisations and senior members of Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander  communities.  For  over  a  decade  AIMhi  has  developed  a  range  of 
culturally adapted information sheets, flip charts and the AIMhi approach to brief 
therapy - Motivational Care Planning. The AIMhi Stay Strong Care Plan has now 
been  translated  into  an  e-mental  health  resource,  the  AIMhi  Stay  Strong  App, 
and is promoted within the eMental Health in Practice (eMHPrac) project. 

eMental Health in Practice 
e-Mental  health  (also  referred  to  as  digital  mental  health  resources)  provide 
treatment  and  support  to  people  through  telephone,  mobile  phone,  computer, 
smart  devices  and  online  applications.  They  range  from  the  provision  of  health 
information,  peer  support  services,  virtual  applications  and  games,  through  to 
real-time  interaction  with  clinicians  trained  to  assist  people  experiencing  mental 
health issues. See Appendix A for links to other e-mental health resources.  

The Australian Government’s e-Mental Health Strategy for Australia (DoH, 2014) 
aims to improve awareness, knowledge and use of e-mental health resources. E-
Mental  Health  in  Practice  (eMHPrac)  is  a  support  service  and  project  funded 
implementation  and 
through 
promoting  awareness  of  e-mental  health  resources  to  health  professionals 
working in primary healthcare (eMHPrac, 2018).  

the  Strategy,  providing 

training,  supporting 

eMHPrac  is  a  collaboration  between  Menzies  School  of  Health  Research,  the 
University Centre for Rural Health, Black Dog Institute and is led by Queensland 
University  of  Technology.  As  part  of  the  eMHPrac  Indigenous  stream,  Menzies 
provides  training  in  the  AIMhi  Stay  Strong  App  and  other  e-mental  health 
resources  to  health  professionals  in  primary  healthcare  working  with  Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander clients. 

The AIMhi Theoretical Framework  
Motivational  Care  Planning  (MCP)  is  based  on  15  years  of  theoretical 
development, clinical practice, and empirical research. This therapy is different in 
many ways from traditional approaches to treatment.  MCP draws on a range of 
brief  therapies  such  as  motivational  interviewing,  problem  solving  therapy, 
positive  psychology  and  solution  focused  therapy  (Cuijpers,  van  Straten,  van 
Sciak, & Andersson, 2009). The focus of the intervention is to promote behavior 
change through reviewing the client’s social connections, individual strengths and 
stressors.  It  has  a  focus  on  the  ‘here  and  now’  and  on  current  behavior  and 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

planning for change to improve lifestyle choices. The motivation to make change 
is  developed  through  the  comparison  of  individual  values  and  life  priorities  with 
actions, life style behaviors or symptoms that are causing distress. The four step 
intervention  explores:  family  and  friends,  strengths,  stressors  and  setting  goals 
for change. 

MCP shares principles of cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) such as: 

•  Establishing a strong therapeutic alliance 
•  Focus on discrete goals 
•  Focus on the here-and-now 
•  Cognitive reappraisal 
•  Patient as collaborative partner (Karwoski, Garratt, & Ilardi, 2006) 

MCP  shares  the  positive  psychology  aim  of  building  on  the  person’s  existing 
strengths to enhance emotional wellbeing. The  ‘aim of positive psychology is to 
catalyse  a  change  in  psychology  from  a  preoccupation  only  with  repairing  the 
worst  things  in  life  to  also  building  the  best  qualities  in  life’  (Seligman,  2002). 
MCP  also  has  overlap  with  motivational  interviewing  techniques,  in  particular 
supporting  self-efficacy  and  developing  discrepancy  (Treasure,  2004)  and  with 
solution  focused  therapy  which  also  focuses  on  competency  and  strength  in 
clients and is underpinned by the following principles: if it’s working keep doing it, 
if  it’s  not  working  stop  doing  it,  and  keep  therapy  as  simple as possible  (Nagel, 
2007; O'Connell, 2005). 

to 

identify 

in  which  clients  and  practitioners  collaborate 

In  addition,  this  approach  is  aligned  with  principles  of  behavioural  activation 
target 
therapy 
behaviours,  goals,  and  rewards  that  reinforce  non-depressive  or  healthy 
behaviour,  which  has  also  been  shown  to  be  efficacious  and  cost  effective  in 
comparison  with  CBT  (Veale  2008).  MCP  is  designed  to  be  delivered  in  one  or 
two  sessions  by  workers  who  may  have  little  training  in  counselling  and  limited 
time,  and  with  clients  who  may  have  low  literacy  or  language  difference  and  in 
individual  or  group  settings.  These  aspects  of  the  MCP  intervention  render  it  a 
‘low  intensity’  cognitive  behavioural  intervention  (Bennett-Levy,  Richards,  & 
Farrand,  2010).  It  is  a  client  centred  model,  which,  similar  to  solution  focused 
therapy, focuses on clients’ strengths and previous successes. There is a focus 
on  working  from  the  client’s  understandings  of  their  concern/situation  and  what 
they might want to do differently.  

The  AIMhi  Stay  Strong  approach  has  some  key  differences  to  other  brief 
therapies; it is culturally adapted for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people 
and  presents  a  holistic  model  of  mental  health  and  wellbeing.  The  Stay  Strong 
approach uses colorful pictures to support a conversation about areas of stress-
vulnerability  and  uses  metaphors  from  daily  life  to  promote  engagement  and 
understanding.  MCP  begins  by  looking  at  the  role  of  family  support  and  client 
strengths before worries are reviewed. Following these three steps, the client and 
practitioner  discuss  setting  goals  for  life  style  change  using  simple  and 

5 

 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

achievable  steps  to  support  the  person  to  plan  for  change,  and  over  time 
measure outcomes and celebrate successes. The simple step by step approach 
allows  practitioners  to  acquire  MCP  skills  with  ease.  Evaluation  of  training 
provided by the Menzies School of Health Research has shown that practitioners 
value  the  training,  have  improved  confidence  and  knowledge,  and  continue  to 
use  elements  of  the  approach  long  after  receipt  of  brief  training  (Dingwall, 
Puszka, Sweet, Mills, & Nagel, 2015). 

Key steps for the AIMhi Stay Strong approach 

•  Review of family and other key people who are supportive 
•  Review  of  strengths  in  a  holistic  framework  inclusive  of  culture  and 

spirituality 

•  Review of stressors and worries 
•  Review of reasons to change linked with family, strengths and stressors 
•  Simple goal setting and discussion  
•  Focus on developing simple steps to the goals  
•  Review of steps and goals over time 

Rationale  

A person’s ‘balance’ and wellbeing is a result of resilience factors and risk factors 
that constantly interact (Mueser et al., 2002). At any time decisions can be made 
that  might  change  the  balance  and  thus  decrease  or  increase  a  person’s 
vulnerability  to  mental  illness.  Knowing  which  of  these  factors  are  important  in 
relapse  of  illness,  and  what  can  be  done  in  terms  of  change,  is  an  important 
component  of  self-management.  The  key  message  is  that  of  the  need  to  build 
strengths  and  mitigate  stressors,  in  order  to  promote  resilience  and  diminish 
vulnerability  to  mental  illness.  Some  risk  factors  are  beyond  a  person’s  control 
such as genetic or environmental influences, but others are within an individual’s 
power  to  change  and  influence.  Current  distress  is  thus  caused  by  diminished 
healthy behaviours through choice and/or lack of opportunity. These behaviours 
negatively  influence  identity  and  self-efficacy  and  lead  to  vulnerability  to 
depression  and  a  range  of  other  mental  illnesses.  Healthy  behaviours  are 
culturally  informed  and  include  cultural  and  spiritual  activities,  family  and 
community engagement as well as physical activity. Planning and supporting and 
reinforcing healthy and rewarding behaviours will promote resilience and improve 
wellbeing  through  positive  reward,  improved  self-identity  and  greater  self-
efficacy. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Stay Strong is a different approach 

We  have  a  yarn  first  about  family  and 
strengths,  spending 
time  developing 
trust  and  relationship  rather  than  going 
straight to the problem.  

family  and  strengths  as 
We  use 
motivation for change. The discussion of 
strengths  and  stressors  is  holistic  and 
covers  physical,  cultural,  mental,  and 
social aspects to life. 

The  person  controls  the  process.  They 
identify each strength and each stressor 
of their own, we don’t write anything that 
they  see 
they  haven’t  volunteered, 
everything  that  is  written,  they  own  the 
plan, and take home a copy of the plan. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Using the Stay Strong Approach with clients 

Cultural context 
Here is an example of the introduction to the AIMhi approach which we use to set 
the  cultural  context.  The  following  text  is  provided  by  one  of  the  AIMhi 
researchers/Aboriginal Mental Health Workers John Cusack: 

“Hello and welcome to Yarning about Mental Health.  
Our people have strong culture. We are artists and 
storytellers, we are sporting legends and skilled hunters, we 
are musicians and dancers and uncles and aunties and 
grandmothers and grandfathers. Most of all we are teachers, 
and we are teaching our children to find their way in a 
modern world.  
Our kids need a guide to navigate and find their way in the 
modern world … they need to take culture with them…and to 
bring both worlds into one…They need to be strengthened by 
culture… 
We can teach them how to be an Indigenous person in the 
non-Indigenous world by having that support of language 
and family and community and kinship keeping them strong.  
Another important thing to teach them is how to do more of 
the things that keep them strong. Things like art and music 
and storytelling, and work that keeps family and culture 
alive. That way there isn’t that gap in their lives. That way 
there isn’t that emptiness where culture used to be.  
It’s when our children get that gap, and they don’t know who 
they are or where they belong, that’s when that mental health 
problems can take over and it can link with drugs and 
alcohol and humbug or violence.” 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Rapport (good connection) 
Understanding and communicating with Aboriginal clients is usually helped by: 

•  having supportive and appropriate (e.g. right kinship) family members 

present 

•  working with an Aboriginal Health or Mental Health Worker (AMHW) 
recognising that some people feel more comfortable talking outdoors 
• 
•  establishing which languages are spoken and what level of English is 

understood 

•  sitting side by side rather than across from people/clients to mediate eye 

contact 
recognising that some people may have hearing difficulties 

• 
•  avoiding direct questions  
•  avoiding direct eye contact 
•  making interactions concise and meaningful so as not to sit for too long 
talking about strengths and family relationships before talking about the 
• 
problems 

•  using visual guides to assist conversation 
•  using stories to assist connection and rapport, and 
• 

recognising that client communicative norms may include long pauses and 
allowing time for response before prompting them 

The Four Step Stay Strong Plan  
The 4 step plan is a way of engaging with clients before you assess them or as a 
goal setting brief intervention at the end of your assessment. The first two steps 
in  the  Stay  Strong  Approach  are  about  getting  to  know  people.  Whether  it’s 
someone  you  are  working  with,  or  someone  you  are  going  to  interview  –  it’s  a 
good idea to get to know them a bit first. One of the ways to do that is to take into 
account  the  above  rapport  suggestions  and  to  talk  about  family,  and  to  get  a 
sense  of  who  is  important  to  them.  Another  way  to  do  it  is  to  talk  about  what 
activities we like to do – what things keep us strong.  

The  plan  uses  the  metaphor  of  a  tree  to  talk  about  mental  health.  The  Grow 
Strong Tree is a picture of a plant that represents our mental health  – with four 
root systems and four healthy leaves. The roots represent the foundations of our 
mental health - the Spiritual, Physical, Family, Social and Work, and Mental and 
Emotional components of our lives. 

9 

 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Step 1 and 2: Family and Strengths 
These two steps are about developing rapport and sharing understandings.  

•  Talking about our strengths, family, friends and activities is a good way to get 

to know someone.   

•  Talking about family can help us to see the networks of healing and the paths 

for support of that client and that family. 

•  As we talk about family and strengths we can begin to know what is already 

strong and have a yarn about how to make it stronger. 

•  Looking at family connections and recognising their importance helps to link 

them in to the steps to goals for change. 

•  Plans for change are stronger if support people named on the plan hear about 

their role with client consent. 

•  The plan can strengthen the support networks surrounding the client. 
•  Using the Stay Strong App we can type in names of supportive  family and friends 
and select the relationship they have to the client and the role they play in their life 

 What you might say: Step 1  

One of the important ways in which we can stay strong and have balance in our 
lives  is  to  have  strong  people  around  us  who  help  to  keep  us  feeling  okay 
during  the  tough  times.  This  is  your  family  map,  and  this  is  you  in  the  centre. 
Who  would  you  put  around  you  on  your  family  map?  Who  is  it  that  helps  to 
keep you strong and in balance? What relationship do they have to you? What 
role  would  you  say  they  have  in  your  life?  E.g.  someone  you  can  talk  to, 
someone who is always there… 

•  Talking about strengths helps to remind us of good things in our lives. The things we 

value about ourselves and the people around us.  

•  Talking about our strengths helps to establish rapport and connection between 

people 

•  Using the Grow Strong Tree to describe strengths is an easy way to start talking 

about wellbeing and mental health. 

•  Using the Stay Strong App we can select the strengths that fit and type a word or two 

that describe that strength in more detail.   

10 

 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

 What you might say: Step 2 

There  are  four  main  ways  in  which  we  keep  strong  in  our  lives.  Spiritual, 
physical, family, work and emotional strengths keep us in balance –like strong 
roots  of  a  tree.  When  we  are  in  balance  we  grow  strong  mental  health. 
Worries  and  stress  and  trouble  can  take  away  our  balance.  Changes  for 
strength  can  help  us  find  balance  again.  Looking  at  this  tree…what  sorts  of 
things in your life – spiritual, physical, social or mental and emotional help to 
keep you strong? The more strength we have, the stronger we can be - even 
during  tough  times.  Look  at  each  of  the  pictures  on  this  tree.  Do  they 
represent  something  that  fits  with  your  own  experience?  Tell  me  a  little  bit 
more about that?  

Step 3 and 4: Exploring Worries and Setting Goals 
Having  taken  time  to  review  positive  aspects  of  people’s  lives  there  is  more 
chance  that  you  have  established  rapport  before  you  begin  to  talk  about  the 
sensitive  areas  of  concern  in  their  lives.  An  important  difference  in  the  Stay 
Strong approach is that we explore worries after talking about strengths and that 
we allow the person to volunteer them rather than directly asking questions. 

3What you might say: Step 3 

Moving  on…  looking  at  the  tree  again  …worries  in  our  lives  can  take  our 
balance away. What sorts of spiritual, physical, social and mental and emotional 
things take your strength away? Do any of these fit with you? Tell me a little bit 
more about that? 

Setting goals for change 
Once the first three steps are complete we are in a good position to be thinking 
and planning for change. Our goals are the things we want to change. We need 
to  think  of  steps  to  these  goals  and  we  want  the  goals  and  the  steps  to  be 
achievable  and  practical  and  simple.  Steps  are  the  goals  broken  down  to 
manageable,  smaller actions. If  you  have  a  goal to  do further study  –  a  step  to 
that goal might be to find about more about possible study courses, another step 
might be to get some more information, or to talk to someone or to make a phone 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

call. Steps tend to be more specific and more detailed than goals. The best way 
to  plan  goals  and  steps  is  to  ask  four  questions:  What?  Why?  How?  Who? 
When?  

We are encouraging clients to identify their 
own personal goals and their own steps to 
those goals.   

As we encourage goal setting and 
communication within the support network- 
we support empowerment of that network 
and all of those within the network. 

SMART goals 

Another way to think about goals is to aim to set ‘SMART’ goals. SMART goals 
are Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic and Timely. 

Specific:  A  specific  goal  has  a  better  chance  of  being  reached  than  a  general 
goal. To set a specific goal aim to answer the “W” questions: 

What:  
Who:   
Where: 
When: 

What do I want to do? 
Who can help? 
Identify a place related to the goal. 
When will you do it/how long will it take 

Measurable: To see if a goal is measurable, ask questions such as…… 

•  How much? How many? 
•  How will you know when it is reached? 

Attainable: When you identify goals that are most important to you, you begin to 
figure out ways you can realise them. This is where the client choosing their own 
goals  is  important,  as  they  are  the  one  that  best  knows  what  is  possible.  You 
might think and talk about goals that have been reached in the past, it helps to 
remember what you can do if you really try.  

Realistic: A goal is realistic if you want it and you can actually do the steps that 
are needed to reach it. The steps are very important, because they break down a 
big task into smaller, more manageable steps. 

Timely:  A  goal  works  best  when  it  is put  within  a  time  frame  so  that  you  know 
when to begin and how you are going to continue. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

 What you might say: Step 4 

Thinking  about  the  people  in  your  life  who  keep  you  strong  and  thinking 
about  the  good  things  that  you  do  and  that  you  value,  and  thinking  about 
your  worries,  what  would  be  one  small  thing  that  you  might  think  about 
changing? Anything else? 
•  Tell me a bit more about what that change means for you 
•  Why would making that change be a good thing to do? 
•  Out of those changes, what would be the most important thing to change 

• 

right now?  
If that’s the most important goal for now let’s talk about how you could go 
about it? 

•  Have you made changes like that before? Tell me about how that went. 
•  What small step could you do first? Who could help?  
•  Remember, anyone can make changes when they are ready small steps 

can lead to big changes 

Build motivation 

Build  confidence  by  reviewing  examples  of  success  –  either  past  successful 
changes  the  client  has  made  or  others  (such  as  “Robbie’s  story”  which  is  an 
AIMhi video about making successful changes)   

Promote  discrepancy  and  dissonance  by  comparing  the  ‘ideal’  and  positive 
strengths  a  person  reports  on  their  strengths  page  with  the  worries  that  they 
have.  Highlight  differences  and  promote  any  links  which  arise  throughout  the 
discussion. 

Maintain rapport through avoiding suggestions and asking direct questions. 

Risk Management  
In  the  context  of  the  high  risk  associated  with  mental  illness,  strategies  to 
educate service providers and the wider community about immediate actions and 
pathways  to  care are vital.  Campaigns  by  Rotary  and  ‘beyondblue’ and  specific 
community  education  packages  have  been  major  steps  toward  improved 
community mental health literacy (LivingWorks). In addition, adapted community 
training  packages  such  as  ‘Mental  Health  First  Aid’  (Beyondblue,  2008; 
"http://bluepages.anu.edu.au/,"  ;  "http://moodgym.anu.edu.au,"  ;  Kitchener  BA  & 
Jorm  AF,  2002)  Suicide  Story  (Mental  Health  Association  of  Central  Australia, 
2018)  and  the  AIMhi  resources  have  offered  Indigenous  specific  training 
targeting  suicide  prevention  and  improved  access  to  treatment. A  key  message 
of  suicide  prevention  is  that  any  person  might  be  approached  for  help  by 

13 

 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

someone at risk and will benefit from developing basic skills.  

Risk Management tips below apply to all of us. 

Pay attention 
Read signs of concern  
Trust your hunches  
Take any talk of suicide seriously  
Show respect 
Try to understand  
Be yourself  
Take them seriously  

Reach out 
Show you care  
Tell them what you noticed  
Take time to listen  
Check it out 
Say things like “lately I’ve noticed…”  
Ask others what they’ve noticed  
If in doubt check it out  

Give support 
Let them talk  
Explore other options  
Build realistic hope  
Get more support (eg family, mates, counsellors, crisis lines)  
Ask about suicide 
If concerned, ask directly “Are you thinking of suicide?”  

Get help 
Don’t leave if there’s a risk of suicide  
Remove available means of harm  
Know your limits ... involve others, get further help  
Follow up ... stay alert to ongoing needs / risk   
Keep safe 
Focus on safety first  
Encourage no self harm  
Look out for your safety and safety of others  

Avoid 
‘Quick fixes’ & ‘cheer up’ advice  
Telling them not to worry  
Drinking to avoid the pain  
(Lifeline, 2010) 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Know early warning signs  
Everyone gets stressed sometimes and we all have warning signs that stress is 
building up. If we pick up stress early we can do something about it before it gets 
out of control. In the same way if we pick up mental illness early we can make 
changes before we have a relapse. Common early warning signs of relapse are:   

irritability (feeling ‘cranky’),  
tension or worry,  

• 
• 
•  social withdrawal (sitting down alone),  
•  poor appetite,  
•  poor sleep. 

These are early changes that happen before relapse. Knowing warning signs 
helps people to avoid relapse and to recover from mental illness by having more 
control of it. 
Have a crisis plan 
Work out what you will do in a crisis, when your early warning signs are getting 
out of control. Plan where you will get help, who you will go to, and what you will 
do.  You  can  write  this  on  your  stay  strong  plan  and/or  talk  it  through  with  your 
support person. 
Risk assessment 
There are three main sorts of risk – risk of hurting yourself intentionally, or hurting 
others intentionally, and vulnerability (of getting hurt accidentally through poor 
decision-making). Consider the following questions for vulnerability risk:  

•  Does this person have trouble looking after themselves? 
•  Do they have trouble protecting themselves from others – and not getting 

hurt? 

•  Are they at risk when they are away from their support and carers and 

family? 

Suicide risk assessment 
Important background factors for suicide risk are: 

Suicide attempts in the past 
Unmarried / unemployed / not going to school 
Illness – physical or mental 
Ceremonies to say goodbye (making a will or giving way possessions) 
Isolation socially 
Drugs, Alcohol and other volatile substances 
Events – grief, loss, stress, knowing people who have committed suicide 

15 

 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Important immediate factors for suicide risk are: 

Plan – having a plan to hurt themselves 
Lethality – having a plan that is likely to result in injury or death 
Access – the person being able to carry out their plan 
Negative views of self and future (they want to die) 

Risk of harm to others 
Past violence is the main risk factor for more violent behaviour – but also think 
about: 

•  Substance Misuse 
•  Family history 
•  Anti-social behaviours 

Complete your risk assessment  
You may already have a risk assessment or risk management template to use as 
a guide for some of the risk factors mentioned above. It is important to use  your 
knowledge of the client, their discussion or their worries, and by asking questions 
to fill in gaps. The purpose of your assessment is to decide on today’s risk – but 
you can use past history and other information to come to your decision. If there 
are  any  signs  of  risk,  ensure  that  you  make  the  appropriate  arrangements  to 
ensure that the risk is managed according to the severity of your assessment. 

Safe follow-up plans 
If you are not sure whether a person will be safe when you have seen 
them – check that you have the following things in place: 

Support and supervision-a place to stay, someone reliable to stay with 
Appointment time given for follow up 
Follow up and treatment is arranged 
Engagement with your plan is in place (they think it is a good idea) 
Resolution or partial resolution of the crisis (something has changed 
for the better) 

If  you  can’t  have  this  safer  plan  in  place  and  you  are  worried  about  risk–  then 
consider  supported  and  supervised  arrangements  including  a  safe  house  or 
hospital. 

Talk to your supervisor, look at guidelines such as the CARPA manual, take definite 
action, and write all of your decisions in the appropriate file. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Managing risk – Crisis Contacts 

24-HOUR TELEPHONE COUNSELLING  

•  Emergency 000 
•  Lifeline 13 11 14 
•  Kids Helpline 1800 551 800 
•  MensLine Australia 1300 789 978 
•  Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467 
•  Beyond Blue 1300 22 46 36 
•  Headspace 1800 650 890 
•  QLife  1800 184 527 
•  State-wide Crisis Numbers Blue Pages  

Other Mental health helplines and services can be found by 
searching the HealthDirect web page. 

Diagnosis of mental illness 

People who have lots of worries can get a mental illness – especially if they have 
been  unwell  before,  or  if  it  runs  in  the  family.  The  pattern  of  mental  illness  is 
different for different  people. The  pattern  is about  changes  in  thoughts, feelings 
and behaviour – changes in what people say and do. Some people hear voices, 
some  people  just  get  very  sad  and  stay  inside  the  house  all  day,  some  people 
get  too much  energy  and fight and  shout and  cause  trouble,  some  people hear 
voices,  some  people  get  very  worried  and  nervous  and  anxious,  and  some 
people get mixtures of all of those things. It’s important to work out the pattern of 
someone’s  illness.  Different  patterns  respond  to  different  medicines  and 
treatments. If people with mental illness get to know their own illness pattern they 
can recognize and treat it early. Four important patterns are anxiety, depression, 
mania  and  psychosis.  The  AIMHI  information  sheets  talk  about  the  pattern  of 
thoughts and feelings and behaviors for those four sorts of mental illness. 

There are four main ways to diagnose mental health problems.  

1.  Talk to the person about how they are going – take a history  
2.  Talk  to  family  and  others  about  how  they  are  going  –  collect  collateral 

history  

3.  Check out their physical health – do a physical examination 
4.  Listen  to  what  they  say  and  what  they  do  carefully  and  closely    –  do  a 

mental state examination 

17 

 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Mental State Examination 
Assessing a person’s mental state is like reading their body language. Most of us 
can  tell  how  someone  is feeling  without  them  saying  anything. When  we  watch 
and  listen  closely  we  can  have  more  information  to  help  us  to  decide  about 
diagnosis  and  risk.  We  can  use  the  following  simplified  list  of  six  headings  to 
structure our assessment of body language. 

•  Appearance:  Neat? Clean? Strange? 
•  Behaviour: Calm? Agitated? Appropriate? Cooperative? Distracted? 
•  Conversation:  Silly talk? Wrong talk? Mixed up talk? Fast talk? 
•  Affect:  Unhappy? Angry? Too happy? Afraid? Unconcerned? 
•  Perception: Hearing voices? Seeing things? Talking to self?  
•  Cognition: Remembering OK? Confused? 

Activity 

     Mental state examination adds information to our assessment. 

Consider the following example – you are seeing a 26-year-old woman with two 
children  who  says  she  has  been  sad  since  her  partner  left  her  12  months  ago. 
She is physically well on examination. Her mother says that she used to work full 
time, but she has not been going out of the house for 2 months. You see her with 
the  Aboriginal  Mental  Health  Worker  and  her  mother.  Below  are  two  different 
mental state examinations. 

Which worries you more – Scenario 1 or Scenario 2?  

Scenario 1  
Appearance    
Behaviour 
Conversation   
Affect   
Perception     
Cognition 

Scenario 2 
Appearance    
Behaviour   
Conversation   
Affect   
Perception  
Cognition   

neat and clean 
shy but appropriate 
slow but appropriate  
sad and anxious 
no abnormal perception 
fairly good attention and concentration  

dirty clothes and unwashed appearance 
withdrawn, no eye contact, slow movements 
only occasional words 
sad  
no abnormal perception 
poor concentration and easily distracted 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Answer 

Scenario 2 suggests more severe mental illness and greater risk. 
The same history and the same collateral history and the same physical findings. 
A different mental state examination can lead us to have a different assessment 
of the case.  

Kessler 10 (K10) 
The  Kessler  Psychological  Distress  Scale-10  (K10),  developed  by  Professors 
Ron  Kessler  and  Dan  Mroczek,  is  a  10  item  questionnaire  which  measures 
psychological  distress based  on  questions  about  people's  level of nervousness, 
agitation,  psychological  fatigue  and  depression  in  the  past  four  weeks  prior  to 
interview (ABS, 2001). The K10 is available on the android version of the App.  

For each  question,  there  is a five-level response  scale  based  on the  amount of 
time  that  a  respondent  experienced  those  particular  feelings.  The  response 
options are:  

1.  None of the time  
2.  A little of the time  
3.  Some of the time  
4.  Most of the time  
5.  All of the time. 

Each of the items are scored from 1 for 'none' to 5 for 'all of the time'. Scores for 
the ten items are added together, clients can have a minimum possible score of 
10 and a maximum possible score of 50, with low scores indicating low levels of 
psychological distress and high scores indicating high levels of psychological 
distress. 

K10 results are commonly grouped for output. The results are grouped in the 
following four levels of psychological distress:  

•  Low (scores of 10-15, indicating little or no psychological distress)  
•  Moderate (scores of 16-21)  
•  High (scores of 22-29)  
•  Very high (scores of 30-50). 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Additional information about mental illness 
•  Mental  Health  is  about  being  well  and  strong  and  balanced  in  our  spiritual, 

physical, social and emotional lives. 

•  Traditional  healers,  talk  therapies  and/or  social  changes  can  be  better  than 

medication alone for some people. 

•  Engaging  Aboriginal  Health  Workers  or  Aboriginal  Mental  Health  Workers 

could be important. 

•  Mental Illness is like physical illness – the sooner you treat it the sooner you 

get better. 

•  Life events, change of medication, or substance misuse are common causes 

of relapse and getting sick again. 

• 

If  we  have  too  many  troubles  any  one  of  us  can  get  sick,  and  get  out  of 
balance. 

•  Early  warning  signs  –  such  as  change  of  sleep  or  appetite,  or  increased 
restlessness  or  tension,  or  not  wanting  to  be  with  other  people,  are  the 
signals to go and get extra treatment and help. Everyone has his or her own 
early warning signs. 

•  Medication, life style change, and increased support in tough times can help 

to avoid relapses and to stop people getting sick again. 

•  People  make  changes  in  their  lives  when  they  are  ready.  There  are  lots  of 

different ways to change. 

•  Often small changes in our spiritual, physical, social and emotional lives are 

all that is needed to be healthy and in balance again. 

Cultural assessment and belief systems 

Culturally-shaped  belief  systems  and  spirituality  can  impact  on  the  way  mental 
health and mental illness is expressed. When Aboriginal people talk about being 
cursed or seeing spirits it may be a normal experience within their belief systems  
and  it  may  be  misinterpreted  as  ‘psychosis’.  The  only  way  to  be  sure  whether 
unusual behaviour is culture or illness is to seek advice from a family member, a 
health  worker,  or  a  mental  health  worker.  Only  when  you  have  a  three  way 
assessment  can  you  be  sure  that  you  understand  the  whole  problem  and  have 
ideas for a holistic solution. 

20 

 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

References 

ABS. (2001). Use of the Kessler Psychological Distress Scale in ABS Health Surveys.   

Retrieved April 2018, 2018, from 
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/papersbyReleaseDate/4D5BD3
24FE8B415FCA2579D500161D57 

Bennett-Levy, J., Richards, D., & Farrand, P. (2010). The Oxford guide to low intensity 

CBT interventions. Oxford: Oxford University Press,. 

Beyondblue. (2008). Available from URL: http://www.beyondblue.org.au/ Retrieved 

February, 2010 

Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., van Sciak, A., & Andersson, G. (2009). Psychological 

treatment of depression in primary care: a meta-analysis. Br J Gen Pract.  
Dingwall, K. M., Puszka, S., Sweet, M., Mills, P. P. J. R., & Nagel, T. (2015). Evaluation 
of a culturally adapted training course in Indigenous e-mental health. Australasian 
Psychiatry, 23(6), 630-635. doi: 10.1177/1039856215608282 

DoH. (2014). E-mental health strategy for Australia.   Retrieved April 2018, 2018, from 

http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/mental-
pubs-e-emstrat 

eMHPrac. (2018). eMHPrac Training and Support.   Retrieved April 2018, 2018, from 

http://www.emhprac.org.au/ 

http://bluepages.anu.edu.au/.    
http://moodgym.anu.edu.au.    
Karwoski, L., Garratt, G., & Ilardi, S. (2006). On the Integration of Cognitive-Behavioral 

Therapy for Depression and Positive Psychology. Journal of Cognitive 
Psychotherapy Summer, 20(2), 159-170.  

Kitchener BA, & Jorm AF. (2002). Mental Health First Aid Manual. Canberra: Centre 

for Mental Health Research. 

Lifeline. (2010). Tool kit: Suicide Prevention Information for Aboriginal & Torres Strait 

Islander people. A self-help resource to help people living with mental illness. 
from https://www.lifeline.org.au/static/uploads/files/suicide-prevention-
aboriginal-torres-strait-island-wffkdpatqknq.pdf 

LivingWorks.   Retrieved 26/04/2018, 2018, from https://www.livingworks.net/ 
Mental Health Association of Central Australia. (2018). Suicide Story.   Retrieved June, 
2018, from https://mhaca.org.au/education-and-community-awareness/aboriginal-
suicide-prevention/ 

Mueser, K., Corrigan, P., Hilton, D., Tanzman, B., Schaub, A., Gingerich, S., . . . Herz, 
M. (2002). Illness Management and Recovery: A Review of the Research. 
Psychiatr Serv, 53(10), 1272-1284.  

Nagel, T. (2007). Motivational care planning: brief interventions in Indigenous mental 

health. Australian Family Physician, 37(12), 996-1001.  

O'Connell, B. (2005). Solution focused therapy. London: Sage Publications Ltd. 
Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). Authentic Happiness: Using the New Positive Psychology to 

Realize Your Potential for Lasting Fulfillment. New York: Free Press. 
Treasure, J. (2004). Motivational interviewing. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 10, 

331-337.  

21 

 
 
Appendix A: List of Digital Mental Health 
Resources  

iBobbly Suicide Prevention App 

There are not enough health workers available to provide suicide prevention 
services in rural and remote areas, and often people don’t ask for help because 
they feel disconnected, ashamed or are worried about anonymity. ibobbly, an 
app aimed at suicide prevention, can be used anonymously and may be one way 
to reach some at-risk young people. The app delivers treatment based on 
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), which uses mindfulness and 
values-based action and draws on metaphors, stories and imagery. The project 
began as a partnership with Alive & Kicking Goals! (AKG) in the Kimberley, a 
community controlled suicide prevention organisation. The first version of the app 
is being piloted to see if it will reduce suicidal thinking, depression, distress, and 
impulsivity.  

•  vimeo.com: Bluesbusters 1 Girls 
•  vimeo.com: Bluesbusters 2 Boys 

Head to Health 

Head to Health is a national mental health and wellbeing website for both the 
general public and health professionals. The site is managed by Health Direct as 
part of the Australian Government Department of Health Australian e-Mental 
Health Strategy. The website assists health professionals and their clients to find 
relevant mental health and wellbeing information, online programs, services, 
helplines and other resources. Head to Health resources are sourced from the 
leading publically funded health focused organisations in Australia including 
beyondblue, Black Dog Institute, ReachOut.com, Lifeline and many more.  

•  headtohealth.gov.au  

Mindspot 

The MindSpot Clinic is an innovative national mental health service that provides 
virtual assessment and treatment for adults with anxiety and depression. Since 
launching in Dec 2012, the MindSpot Clinic has provided services to more than 
45,000 Australian adults. Mindspot also have an Indigenous Wellbeing Course 
designed to help Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island adults to manage 
symptoms of depression (including low mood) and anxiety (stress, worry, panic, 
social anxiety). MindSpot is funded by the Australian Department of Health, and 
free to Australian adults aged 18 years and over.  

•  mindspot.org.au 

AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

On Track  

Provides programs for concerns about mental and physical health including 
concerns about alcohol, alcohol and depression, unusual experiences/early 
psychosis, flood and storm recovery, diabetes. The sites resources are a mix of 
programs, information, quizzes and advice and provides a program for carers. 

•  ontrack.org.au   

Stayin on Track 

This is a discussion forum developed by Aboriginal men for Aboriginal dad. It is a 
place to yarn about being a dad and helps support dads through fathering at a 
young age. 

•  stayinontrack.com 

myCompass 

Developed by a team of health professionals at the Black Dog Institute, and 
funded by the Australian Government, myCompass is a pioneering e-health 
initiative designed to simply and effectively promote mental health and wellbeing. 
Accessible 24/7 from any internet-enabled computer, mobile phone or iPad, the 
myCompass self-help program assesses user symptoms, then provides a 
personalised and interactive program that includes online psychological tools, 
round-the-clock monitoring of moods and behaviours and motivational tips via 
email and SMS. Most importantly of all, clinical evidence shows that it works.  

•  mycompass.org.au 

National Eating Disorders Collaboration 

The National Eating Disorders Collaboration (NEDC) brings expertise, 
experience and evidence from leaders in the field together in one place. Our 
primary purpose is to make eating disorders information a lot more accessible for 
everyone. The website provides information and links for people affected by 
eating disorders, carers and friends, teachers and health professionals. 

•  nedc.com.au 

Bite Back 

Targets young people (12-25 years) and aims to promote wellbeing and 
resilience through engaging psycho-education, positive psychology and related 
approaches. 

•  biteback.org.au 

23 

 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

BluePages  

Provides information about depression and its treatment. It includes reviews of 
the available scientific evidence for a wide range of treatments, information about 
the experience and symptoms of depression and resources/services that can 
help. 

•  bluepages.anu.edu.au 

BlueBoard  

An online support group for people aged 18 years or over who are affected by 
depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety, eating disorders, borderline personality and 
related disorders. It aims to reduce stigma, and to provide support, hope and 
space to share successful coping strategies. BlueBoard is moderated with strict 
protocols to enhance safety and privacy. 

•  blueboard.anu.edu.au 

ReachOut.com 

Targets individuals under the age of 25. It includes peer support forums, tips, 
links and information for coping with tough times and improving wellbeing, 
volunteering and social engagement. The site also has a list of professionally 
reviewed apps and tools that are available to encourage health and wellbeing. 

•  au.reachout.com 

YouthBeyondBlue 

Targets young people aged between 12 –25 and provides psycho‐ education 
and links to BeyondBlue’s services including phone support and a medical and 
allied health services locator. 

•  youthbeyondblue.com 

Butterfly Foundation 

Provides information, support and referrals for people affected by eating 
disorders. Includes telephone and email support. 

•  thebutterflyfoundation.org.au 

Counselling Online 

24/7 text-based counselling for people concerned about their own or other 
peoples’ substance use. 

•  counsellingonline.org.au  

24 

 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

eheadspace 

A confidential, free and secure space for young people 12 –25 and their families. 
Provides chat, email or phone contact with a qualified youth mental health 
professional. eheadspace can help with a broad range of issues like bullying, 
drug and alcohol issues, depression and anxiety, relationships, concerns about 
friends, study and work, fitting in and isolation. Can also support parents and 
carers worried about a young person. 

•  eheadspace.org.au 

Gambling online 

24/7 text and email counselling for people concerned about their own or another 
person’s gambling. 

•  gamblinghelponline.org.au 

KidsHelpline Online Counselling  

A web-based counselling service for people aged between 5 – 25 years and lets 
you connect one-on-one, in real time, with a Kids Helpline counsellor over the 
web. 

•  kidshelp.com.au/teens 

Lifeline Online Counselling 

A short-term support service for people who are overwhelmed and having 
difficulty coping or staying safe. It occurs in real time using ‘chat’ technology with 
a Lifeline worker. Currently available 8pm-4am (AEST) 7 days. 

•  lifeline.org.au  

Suicide Call Back Service 

Offers text-based online counselling with a professional counsellor. The service 
is available for people affected by suicide, including people who are feeling 
suicidal, people who are worried someone they know may be suicidal, and 
people who have lost someone to suicide. 

•  suicidecallbackservice.org.au  

e-couch 

Modules for depression, generalised anxiety and worry, social anxiety, 
relationship breakdown, and loss and grief. It provides evidence-based 
information and teaches strategies drawn from CBT, Interpersonal Therapy, 
relaxation and physical activity. People can access information without 
registration or register for the full program. 

25 

 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

•  ecouch.anu.edu.au  

MoodGYM 

Teaches skills drawn from CBT to help prevent and manage the symptoms of 
depression. It was originally designed for young people but is used by people of 
all ages. The program provides 5 modules which each take about 30 minutes to 
complete. 

•  moodgym.anu.edu.au 

BRAVE Program 

Helps children and teens overcome anxiety by teaching strategies for managing 
anxiety-provoking situations. The programs are free, and provide ways for 
children and teenagers to better cope with their worries. There are also programs 
for parents. 

•  brave4you.psy.uq.edu.au 

eCentreClinic 

Develops and tests treatment courses for people with symptoms of worry, anxiety 
(including OCD and PTSD), stress, depression, low mood, chronic pain and 
epilepsy. Includes courses for adults and older adults. Courses are usually about 
5-6 lessons. Some programs are self-guided and some have therapist support. 

•  ecentreclinic.org   

Mental Health Online(formerly Anxiety Online) 

Provides information, symptom feedback through the e-PASS assessment 
program, publicly available treatment programs (GAD, Social Anxiety, Panic 
Disorder, OCD, PTSD) and opportunities to participate in new programs through 
research trials. Treatment programs can be accessed as self-help for free or with 
therapist support for a small fee. 

•  anxietyonline.org.au 

OCD? Not Me! 

For young people aged 12-18 years with Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. It 
involves 8 stages and provides information, tips, activities, and support to help 
users to overcome the symptoms of OCD. The program also provides support for 
parents and caregivers. 

•  ocdnotme.com.au 

26 

 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

THIS WAY UP™(Crufad) 

Provides courses with in-house clinician support for a small fee to people with a 
special code from their clinician. Also provides free self-help and a range of 
professional education and schools courses. 

•  thiswayup.org.au 

27 

 
Appendix B: Practice Materials 

1. Sample stories from Stay Strong Plans 

Anna’s story 

My Aunty Cathy and my great grandmother Jessie and my daughter Alice help 
keep me strong… My Aunty teaches us culture and we talk about my life and she 
tells me what’s right and what’s good. I want to learn more about culture so I can 
speak more (traditional language) and pass it on to the kids. Sometimes I get 
unhappy, I drink too much and sometimes I get angry and violent. I want to 
change that. 

I want to sit down with that old man (grandfather) every afternoon and talk 
(traditional) language and speak old language and understand culture and 
corroboree that they dance all day. Good things about these changes are that I 
can speak more language, pass it onto (my) kids, and understand when they sing 
(in ceremony).  

(25 year old mother of two) 

Robbie’s Story 

What keeps me strong is our Aboriginal ceremonies and painting and the art 
centre, hunting, fishing and music. 

Things which take my strength away, are worry about being violent, family 
worries, physical health, smoking cigarettes, not knowing about mental illness.  
Trouble with mood swings, high mood and energy, thoughts of self-harm and 
suicide. 

Michael, Ian, Katie-Jean and Carly help keep me strong. 

Strong changes I want to make are to go hunting more and to have bush tucker.  
To have less family humbug and to work at the art centre.  

I want to talk to Carly and Katie-Jean and Ian, and I want to talk to my dad so 
that we can go bush together more.  

I want to talk Nick about the art centre so that I can stretch canvases and to talk 
to Centrelink too to check working casual hours.  

And I want to stop fighting so much with my brothers about Money I want to stop 
borrowing and lending and keep my money in the bank. 

 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

2. AIMHi  Stay  Strong  App  Motivational  Care 

Planning - Adherence Scale 

Phuong Prowse, Tricia Nagel 

The AIMhi Stay Strong App Adherence Scale is used to observe the practice of 
applying the 4 step Stay Strong Plan. The Adherence scale helps to monitor a 
range of factors that support the success of the motivational care plan, and to 
build skills and confidence when using the resource in practice.  

THERAPIST: 

DATE OF RATING: 

INDIVIDUAL/GROUP SESSION: 

TREATMENT SETTING: 

ASSISTANT RATER: 

TOTAL SCORE: 

INSTRUCTIONS TO RATERS: 

1.  RATE  EACH  ITEM:    This  scale  is  designed  so  that  each  item  can  be 

rated on a scale from one to nine.  Do not leave any items blank. 

2.  READ EVERY ITEM: It is recommended that you read each item entirely 
every  time  it  is rated.   It  is also  useful to  be  completely  familiar with  the 
information in the examples for each item before rating it and to continue 
to  refer  to  these  examples  in  order  to  prevent  subsequent  rater  ‘drift’ 
(moving away from the accurate definition of the item). 

3.  REVIEW NOTES:  We recommend that the rater review notes from their 
sessions with clients using the Stay Strong App before completing the self 
assessment.  This  will  enhance  the  accuracy  of  ratings  because  it  helps 
remind raters of information that is relevant to rating the items. 

4.  COMPLETE your rating taking into account all of the client sessions you 
have  delivered  using  the  Stay  Strong  App.  Take  into  consideration  how 
frequently  and  how  successfully  (with  good  effect  within  the  session) 
you fulfilled the objective of each item in your rating.  

5.  PLEASE  PROVIDE  YOUR  RATING  BY  TICKING  OR  CIRCLING  YOUR 
DESIRED RESPONSE ON THE RATING FORM THAT IS PROVIDED. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

GUIDELINES FOR RATING ITEMS 

1. 

ENGAGEMENT 

To what extent do you as the therapist (usually and regularly) seek to establish a 
trusting relationship with your client at commencement and throughout treatment 
through: discussion of country; sharing where you are from; explanation of your 
in  common;  avoidance  of  direct  eye 
role;  discussion  of 
contact/direct  questions  as  appropriate;  use  of  plain  English  as  appropriate; 
and/or reinforcement of the achievements of your client? 

relationships 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

       Not at all 

                Some  
             of the time 

                              All of the time 

A  full  rating  of  9  would  require  that  use  of  the  strategies  outlined  below  (where 
applicable for a  given  client) is a  regular and  successful aspect of  your therapy 
(evidence of success would include strengthened rapport and client engagement 
and interest throughout the session): 

•  Discussion of country and of where you are from (1) 
•  Explanation of your role (1) 
•  Discussion of relationships, people in your life, people you know in common 

(1) 

•  Avoidance of direct eye contact/direct questions as appropriate (1)2 
•  Using plain English/speaking slowly as appropriate (1) 
•  Reinforcement of previous achievements or reminders of positive changes 

(1) 

If one  item  is usually  included then the  scoring  would  be  “6”.  If  two  items  are 
usually  included  then  the  scoring  would  be  ‘7’  if  three  items  are  usually 
included  the  scoring  would  be  “8” and  if  four  items  are  regularly  included  the 
score would be “9”. 

2. 

FAMILY: 

To  what  extent  do  you  as  the  therapist  usually  and  regularly  explore  with  the 
client the important people in the client’s life that keep them strong, or that they 
care for and need to stay well for (e.g. children)?  

2 Eye contact and direct questioning can be experienced as challenging or intrusive in some cross cultural 
settings   

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

       Not at all 

                Some  
             of the time 

                              All of the time 

The purpose of this item is to assess whether the therapist behaviour 
successfully explores the client’s family members and friends (past and present) 
that assist them to stay well or to want to be well. If the exploration of 
relationships is brief and cursory then a score of 5 is given. If exploration of 
patient/client key family members in detail (including relationship and role) is a 
regular and successful aspect of your therapy then a score of “9” is given. Score 
yourself between 5 and 9 according to the degree to which you believe you 
explore relationships in depth and with success. Success would be indicated by 
gaining detailed information while maintaining rapport and keeping within 
reasonable time frames for your setting. 

3. 

STRENGTHS 

To  what  extent  do  you  as  the  therapist  explore  client  strengths  using  the  care 
plan  using  a  simple  visual  metaphor  (e.g.  the  tree)  to  explain  the  interaction 
between strengths and worries and their effect on our wellbeing? 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

       Not at all 

                Some  
             of the time 

                              All of the time 

The  purpose  of  this  item  is  to  assess  whether  the  therapist  explores  strengths 
and positive activities in each of four areas (spiritual and cultural; physical; family, 
social  and  work;  and  mental  and  emotional)  using  a  simple  visual  metaphor  to 
explain the link between wellbeing and strengths. If exploration of client strengths 
is  a  regular  and  successful  aspect  of  your  therapy  a  rating  of  “6”  is  given.  For 
each  of  the  below  items  that  you  regularly  and  successfully  address  in  therapy 
one  mark  on  top  of  the  “six”  is  given.  If  you  as  the  therapist  (regularly  and 
successfully) include all of the below items in your client sessions then a rating of 
“9”  is  given.    Success  would  be  indicated  by  evidence  that  your  client 
understands  these  concepts,  shares  their  information,  and  actively  engages  in 
this aspect of the session. 

•  Using  metaphor  (e.g  the  tree)  to  discuss  social  and  emotional  wellbeing 

(1)  

•  Prioritising strengths through noting which are ‘really important’ (1)  

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

•  Checking, exploring and validating client responses (1)  

4. 

STRESSORS/ WORRIES 

To what extent do you as the therapist explore client stressors and worries using 
a  simple  visual  metaphor  (e.g.  the  tree)  to  explain  the  interaction  between 
strengths and worries and their effect on our wellbeing? 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

       Not at all 

                Some  
             of the time 

                              All of the time 

The  purpose  of  this  item  is  to  assess  whether  the  therapist  explores  client 
stressors  and  worries  and  uses  a  simple  visual  metaphor  to  explain  the  link 
between wellbeing and stressors. If exploration of client worries and stressors is 
a regular and successful aspect of your therapy a rating of “6” is given. For each 
of  the  below  items  that  you  regularly  and  successfully  address  in  therapy  one 
mark on top of the “six” is given. If you as the therapist regularly and successfully 
include all of the below items in your client sessions then a rating of “9” is given.  
Success  would  be  indicated  by  evidence  that  your  client  understands  these 
concepts,  shares  their  information,  and  actively  engages  in  this  aspect  of  the 
session. 

•  Using  metaphor  (e.g  the  tree)  to  explain/discuss  social  and  emotional 

wellbeing (1)  

•  Prioritising worries through noting which are ‘really important’ (1)  
•  Checking, exploring and validating client responses (1)  

5. 

GOAL SETTING: 

To what extent do you as the therapist help the client to choose their own goals 
and steps towards change?  

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

       Not at all 

                Some  
             of the time 

                              All of the time 

For the purpose of this item the therapist must link the information about family, 
strengths and stressors to a plan for change (a goal). In addition, exploration of 
reasons  for  change  (“what  are  the  good  things  about  change?  why  is  it  really 
important for you  to make  change?”)  is needed.    After establishment of at  least 
one  goal,  the  steps  to  change  need  to  include  details  of  how  (the  goal  will  be 
achieved)(1),  what  (will  be  done)(1)  when  (it  will  be  done)(1)  and  who  (can 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

assist in reaching that goal/step)(1). These steps are summarised below: 

•  Linking information about family, strengths and stressors with goal setting 

(1) 

•  Exploring reasons for change and/or past successes (1) 
•  Supporting choice of practical achievable and meaningful goals and steps 

(1) 

•  Assist to identify practical (what, who, when) steps toward each goal (1) 
•  Using metaphor (e.g. kicking a goal) to explain/discuss goal setting (1) 

The degree of detail of the goal setting is important in the scoring for this item. If 
you  usually,  regularly  and  successfully  develop at  least  one  goal and two  steps 
with  each  client  then a  score of 5  is given.  If  you  as the  therapist  regularly  and 
successfully include at least four of the above items in your client sessions then a 
rating  of  “9”  is  given.  (Success  would  be  indicated  by  your  confidence  that  the 
goals and steps are achievable for your client).   
For  each  of  the  above  items  that  you  usually  and  regularly  address  in  therapy 
one mark is given on top of the “five” given and a rating of between “5” and “9” is 
given.  

USE OF THE SUMMARY FUNCTIONS TO ASSIST MOTIVATION 

To what extent do you as the therapist regularly use the summary pages within 
the  App  or  the  email  summary  (or  another summary  approach)  to  support  your 
client to achieve the steps and goals that they are aiming for between sessions?  

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

       Not at all 

                Some  
             of the time 

                              All of the time 

If the summary page is regularly reviewed with clients during the session then a 
score of  “6” is given. Other  options for  use of the  summary  page and  the  email 
text summary are: 

•  Copy given to client (hard copy or email) (1) 
•  Copy placed in client file (in hard copy or electronic file) (1) 
•  Summary reviewed at follow up (1) 
•  Other use (e.g text message follow up) (1) 

For  each  of  the  above  items  that  are  a  regular  component  of  your  therapy  one 
mark  is  given  on  top  of  the  “6”  given.  If  at  least  three  of  the  above  options  are 
rated. 
included 

score 

then 

“9” 

of 

is 

a 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

3. Goal Setting Activities 

This is the most complex section of motivational care planning and also the most 
challenging section of the APP. 
The FIRST goal has 3 potential steps toward it – identified by the first thing you can 
do to reach this goal, what else you can do to reach this goal and another thing you 
can do to reach this goal. Each of these steps includes prompts for what you will do, 
who will help and when you will do it. 

Goal Setting Activity during Training 

Scenario 1 

Carol is a 22 year old woman from a remote community who presents in town for 
treatment of her alcohol problem. She has domestic violence assault charges (she 
argued with a niece) and has two children (Joe and Lisa) aged 2 and 4 in care with 
child protection services. She has supportive family on her community and was 
recently employed at the child care centre which she enjoyed. Her Auntie May and 
her Mother Peggie are strong supporters of her who have looked after her children in 
the past. Her current boyfriend is now in jail and is the father of one of the children. 
She values her link with her country and her language and enjoys going out bush 
and collecting bush tucker. She is lonely. 

Goal: be less lonely - contact children and contact home community 

Step One:  

1.  What? Arrange a visit or phone call with the children  
2.  Who? Contact child protection  
3.  When? Today 

Step Two: 

1.  What? Look at photos 
2.  Who? Ask family and child protection for help with finding photos  
3.  When? Today 

Step Three 

1.  What? Make a phone call or use facetime or face book or skype to talk to 

family at home 

2.  Who? Ask wellbeing worker for help 
3.  When? Talk with wellbeing worker today 

Goal: manage anger better by more relaxation 

Step One 

1.  What? Start a fitness program – walk every day 
2.  Who? Aunty will help/will walk with me 
3.  When? Talk with Aunty today 

Scenario 2 
Brendan is a 25 year old man has thoughts of self harm, worries about alcohol use 
and feelings of sadness. He lives locally in Darwin. His key strengths are music and 
art work and his engagement with Larrakiah nation activities. He also has family in 
Darwin (mother Anna, uncle Jeff and two children Lea and Johnnie). He is separated 
from the mother of his children and does not see them often.  

34 

 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Goal: cut down grog (stay stopped) 

Step One 

1.  What? Avoid drinking mates and family 
2.  Who? Mum will help/will remind me 
3.  When? Talk with Mum today 

Step Two 

1.  What? Do more art at Larrakiah nation 
2.  Who? Uncle will help 
3.  When? Talk with Uncle today 

Step Three 

1.  What? Do more exercise/get fit again 
2.  Who? Mate will help – 
3.  When? Go jogging during the week after 5 pm 

Scenario 3 
Tom is a 48 year old man is thinking of seeking treatment for his cannabis and 
alcohol problem. He feels like he is not getting anywhere in his life. He does not have 
a job and relies on Centrelink payments. He is living with his brother Ian and borrows 
from his employed brother every week. They have arguments about money and 
cigarettes and gunja. He enjoys fishing and camping and going out bush with family 
(nephew Ronnie and Uncle Jim).  

Goal: to have fewer arguments 

Step One 

1.  What?  Talk to social and emotional wellbeing worker about treatment for 

alcohol and drug use 

2.  Who? Mate and brother will help  
3.  When? Talk to mate and brother tomorrow 

Step Two 

1.  What?  Spend more time out bush/fishing/feeling calmer 
2.  Who? Nephew will help  
3.  When? Talk to nephew and brother tomorrow 

Step Three 

1.  What?  Find out about a part time job out bush 
2.  Who? Brother and Centrelink will help  
3.  When? Talk to brother about going to Centrelink tomorrow 

Goal: to cut down cannabis 

Step One 

1.  What?  Avoid friends and mates who smoke by going for a walk in the 

morning when they come round 

2.  Who? Best mate will help (as he does not smoke) 
3.  When? In the mornings 

Step Two 

1.  What?  Spend money on food first before grog and cannabis 
2.  Who? Brother will help  
3.  When? Pay day 

35 

 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Goal Setting Practice ONE 

Case 1. 
John is a 22 year old man supported by his brother and a good mate. He says that 
his strengths are – ‘family’ and ‘going to country’. His main worries are – ‘gunja’ and 
‘fast food’ and ‘feeling sad’. 
He chooses a goal for more exercise because his mate plays footy and he admires 
him and he wants to feel healthier and good about himself 
The steps you discuss together are for him to join the local team and start footy 
training again and to talk with the coach about this plan this weekend) his mate can 
help here) and he also thinks that telling his brother will be useful as they can go to 
training together (Tuesday nights).A third step to the more exercise goal is to go 
running after work with his brother three times a week 
His second goal is to cut back gunja, his mate can support him. He says the first 
thing he needs to do is to make up his mind, and decides to talk to his brother 
(today). for support, say no to mates who ask him to smoke and avoid them by not 
going to the usual house that they smoke at every day 

Task 1 
Using the above case scenario fill in the goals section. You have information for two 
goals and 3 steps. See how you go at completing the goals section of the APP using 
the above information. 

Goal setting Practice TWO 

Remembering SMART goals, fill in the steps on the APP for the following goals 
chosen by a 17 year old female year 11 student with strengths in music and family 
and worries including anxiety and drinking alcohol on weekends (imagine/ be 
creative about what your young client might volunteer as steps) and why the goals 
would be good (tip - check out the tips page). 

Task 2 
Fill in the steps on the APP for the following goals 
Goal one: more focus on school work 
Goal two: learn to relax more 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

Answer sheet for goal setting practice  
Yours can be somewhat different but here is one set of answers: 
Case 1.  
Goal one: More exercise 
Step one:  

1.  Talk to coach of the local team about joining up 
2.  Mate can help 
3.  This weekend 

Step two:  

1.  Start training with the club 
2.  Brother can help 
3.  Tuesday training nights 

Step three:  

1.  Start running again 
2.  Brother can help 
3.  Run after work three times a week 

Goal two: Smoke less gunja 
Step one:  

•  Make up my mind 
•  Brother can help 
•  Talk to brother today 

Step two:  

1.  Say no and avoid mates 
2.  Brother to help 
3.  Try to avoid every day 

Case 2.  
Example steps might be 
Goal one: more focus on school work 
Step One:  

1.  Write a study plan for each subject 
2.  Talk to the teacher and/or Mum 
3.  Make these changes this week 

Step two: 

1.  Stop going out during the week 
2.  Talk with mum and best friend 
3.  Starting this week 

Goal two: Learn to relax more  
Step one: 

1.  Find out more about relaxation 
2.  School counsellor can help 
3.  Start this weekend 

Step two:  

1.  Look on the internet for relaxation ideas 
2.  Best friend can help 
3.  Start this week 

37 

 
 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

4. Example App Script 

Introducing the App 

“There are many different ways in which we keep strong in our lives. Spiritual, 
physical, family, work and emotional strengths help keep us in balance –like strong 
roots of a tree. When we are in balance we grow strong.  

Our mental health/wellbeing is like a tree, which needs to be fed. When there are 
strong roots feeding those parts of our lives a strong tree can grow. If the roots get 
dry and aren’t fed properly –the tree might get weak.  

We need to keep in balance by making choices that add strength to our lives in all 
areas- spiritual, physical, family, work and emotional. Worries and stress and trouble 
can take away our balance. Making changes for strength in some or all of these 
aspects of our lives can help us find balance again 

This app helps us to look at what keeps us strong and what might take away our 
strength and then make some plans for finding balance again.  Do you want to try it 
out together?”  

[client responds] 

Beginning with the App 

“So this is going to be your story, so let’s put in your name… And the year you were 
you born? What we talk about today stays between us, I will not share it with anyone 
unless you are ok with me doing so or if another staff member is working with you 
later on I might share it with them….3 But if you agree, some of the information we 
put into the app can be collected by the app developers to help them make the 
program better. They will not collect your name so no one will know it is your 
information. So this button here is asking if the developers/Menzies can collect some 
of the information we put into the App for e.g. how long we spend on each page.  Is 
that ok if we send that anonymous information to the developers or would you rather 
not?”  

[client responds] 

“Ok so we’ll keep that one ticked. So because this is your story, if you like, we can 
put in a photo of you?”  

[take client photo] 

“And, There are two options here male or female which would we push for you?”  

[Client responds] 

People who keep me strong page 

And there you are in the centre. One of the important ways in which we can stay 
strong and have balance in our lives is to have strong people around us who help to 
keep us feeling okay during the tough times. This is your family map, and this is you 

3 Sometimes our clients will reveal information that requires mandated reporting or requires that we share it 
with others due to our duty of care to others or to the client themselves. Each service will have its own 
guidelines for how and when to indicate to clients that such information needs to be shared and can no longer be 
kept confidential. We recommend that this issue and your preferred process is clarified before you use the APP 
for the first time with a client. 

38 

 
                                                 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

in the centre. Who would you put around you on your family map? Who is it that 
helps to keep you strong and in balance? 

 [Client talks about family] 

“And thinking about who else would be important for you… who else should we put 
in here?” 

[Client talks about family] 

“Ok we can also come back to that page if you think of someone else.”  

Stay Strong Tree 

“Ok so there are good people in our lives that help us through tough times, but there 
are also things we do that help us grow strong like a tree.  So, looking at this 
tree…what sorts of things in your life – spiritual, physical, social or mental and 
emotional help to keep you strong? Do any of these things here fit for you?” 

[client talks about their strengths] 

Some prompts 

• 
• 
• 

“Do you want to tell me a little bit more about that?”  
“What is important about that?”  
“In what way?” 

Worries page 

“Ok so you’ve got some good strengths there but sometimes we can have some 
worries too or some tough times in our lives…this page is about how those tough 
times sometimes drains our strength and the tree of our mental health might struggle 
a bit. What sorts of things would be important to put in here for you?  What takes 
your strength away?” 

 [Client talks about worries] 

Some prompts  

• 
• 

“Would you like to tell me a little bit more about that?” 
“In what way?” 

[Client talks about worries] 

Goal setting page 

“Ok, so thinking about the people in your life who keep you strong and thinking about 
the good things that you do and that you value and then thinking about your worries, 
what would be one small thing that you might think about changing to help with those 
worries? Remember, anyone can make changes when they are ready, there are lots 
of different steps to change, small steps can lead to big changes.” 

“What would be the most important thing to change right now?  We can make that 
your first goal?” 

[Client talks about goals]  

“And why do you want to make that change, Why would it be a good thing to do?”  

[Client responds] 

 “What could be the first thing that you could do to begin to make that change?” 

39 

 
AIMhi Stay Strong Planning: Brief Treatment Manual 

[Client responds] 

“And when do you want to do that?” 

[Client responds] 

“And who might help you with that?” 

Summarise Step – e.g. “so this afternoon after work, you will pick up the kids and 
then go to Bunnings to get your supplies for the new garden. Great”.   

“So what else might you do to help meet your goal of …?” 

 [Talk about another step] 

“Ok so you’ve set some really good goals there.   On this page, there are a few tips 
that other people have used to help them with making changes. Do any of these 
seem useful in helping with any of the changes you’d like to make?” 

[client looks and selects tips] 

“Ok so before you go I’d like to show you a summary of everything we’ve talked 
about today.”  

[Show pictorial summary] 

“These are the people who keep you strong, and maybe the people who will help you 
in tough times or help you with your goals.   

This is your tree.  It shows you that you have lots of strengths in this area of your life, 
but also some worries here. And so thinking about those strengths and worries, 
these are the goals you have set for making some changes in your life.”  

[Review goals] 

“These are your tips here”. [Review tips] 

“So I’ll email this to myself and print out a copy for you to take with you and before 
we do that, let’s make another time to catch up again and see how you went with 
those goals. Ok?” 

[Make a time with client and then email text summary to self/client]. 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
