Cultural context .............................................................................................. 8 
Rapport (good connection) ............................................................................ 9 
Step 1 and 2: Family and Strengths ............................................................. 10 
Setting goals for change .............................................................................. 11 
We  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  generous  contributions  of  Aboriginal  Mental 
1 Please note that when we mention the term ‘Indigenous’ we include all Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander people and acknowledge their rich traditions and heterogenous cultures 
Hello and welcome to Yarning about Mental Health and the AIMhi mental health 
collaboratively  with  Aboriginal  Mental  Health  Workers,  Aboriginal  and  Torres 
Strait Islander organisations and senior members of Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
culturally adapted information sheets, flip charts and the AIMhi approach to brief 
resources  to  health  professionals  in  primary  healthcare  working  with  Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander clients. 
intervention  explores:  family  and  friends,  strengths,  stressors  and  setting  goals 
•  Focus on discrete goals 
behaviours,  goals,  and  rewards  that  reinforce  non-depressive  or  healthy 
time,  and  with  clients  who  may  have  low  literacy  or  language  difference  and  in 
therapies; it is culturally adapted for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people 
practitioner  discuss  setting  goals  for  life  style  change  using  simple  and 
•  Review  of  strengths  in  a  holistic  framework  inclusive  of  culture  and 
•  Simple goal setting and discussion  
•  Focus on developing simple steps to the goals  
•  Review of steps and goals over time 
culturally  informed  and  include  cultural  and  spiritual  activities,  family  and 
We  have  a  yarn  first  about  family  and 
covers  physical,  cultural,  mental,  and 
Cultural context 
the  cultural  context.  The  following  text  is  provided  by  one  of  the  AIMhi 
researchers/Aboriginal Mental Health Workers John Cusack: 
“Hello and welcome to Yarning about Mental Health.  
Our people have strong culture. We are artists and 
modern world … they need to take culture with them…and to 
culture… 
non-Indigenous world by having that support of language 
and storytelling, and work that keeps family and culture 
there isn’t that emptiness where culture used to be.  
Rapport (good connection) 
Understanding and communicating with Aboriginal clients is usually helped by: 
•  working with an Aboriginal Health or Mental Health Worker (AMHW) 
•  establishing which languages are spoken and what level of English is 
goal setting brief intervention at the end of your assessment. The first two steps 
Step 1 and 2: Family and Strengths 
strong and have a yarn about how to make it stronger. 
them in to the steps to goals for change. 
Setting goals for change 
and planning for change. Our goals are the things we want to change. We need 
to  think  of  steps  to  these  goals  and  we  want  the  goals  and  the  steps  to  be 
achievable  and  practical  and  simple.  Steps  are  the  goals  broken  down  to 
manageable,  smaller actions. If  you  have  a  goal to  do further study  –  a  step  to 
that goal might be to find about more about possible study courses, another step 
call. Steps tend to be more specific and more detailed than goals. The best way 
to  plan  goals  and  steps  is  to  ask  four  questions:  What?  Why?  How?  Who? 
own personal goals and their own steps to 
those goals.   
As we encourage goal setting and 
communication within the support network- 
SMART goals 
Another way to think about goals is to aim to set ‘SMART’ goals. SMART goals 
Specific:  A  specific  goal  has  a  better  chance  of  being  reached  than  a  general 
goal. To set a specific goal aim to answer the “W” questions: 
Identify a place related to the goal. 
Measurable: To see if a goal is measurable, ask questions such as…… 
Attainable: When you identify goals that are most important to you, you begin to 
goals  is  important,  as  they  are  the  one  that  best  knows  what  is  possible.  You 
might think and talk about goals that have been reached in the past, it helps to 
Realistic: A goal is realistic if you want it and you can actually do the steps that 
Timely:  A  goal  works  best  when  it  is put  within  a  time  frame  so  that  you  know 
If that’s the most important goal for now let’s talk about how you could go 
Show respect 
Assessing a person’s mental state is like reading their body language. Most of us 
structure our assessment of body language. 
the  Aboriginal  Mental  Health  Worker  and  her  mother.  Below  are  two  different 
•  Engaging  Aboriginal  Health  Workers  or  Aboriginal  Mental  Health  Workers 
health and mental illness is expressed. When Aboriginal people talk about being 
unusual behaviour is culture or illness is to seek advice from a family member, a 
of a culturally adapted training course in Indigenous e-mental health. Australasian 
Lifeline. (2010). Tool kit: Suicide Prevention Information for Aboriginal & Torres Strait 
designed to help Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island adults to manage 
This is a discussion forum developed by Aboriginal men for Aboriginal dad. It is a 
place to yarn about being a dad and helps support dads through fathering at a 
keep me strong… My Aunty teaches us culture and we talk about my life and she 
tells me what’s right and what’s good. I want to learn more about culture so I can 
speak more (traditional language) and pass it on to the kids. Sometimes I get 
(traditional) language and speak old language and understand culture and 
can speak more language, pass it onto (my) kids, and understand when they sing 
What keeps me strong is our Aboriginal ceremonies and painting and the art 
contact/direct  questions  as  appropriate;  use  of  plain  English  as  appropriate; 
•  Using plain English/speaking slowly as appropriate (1) 
2 Eye contact and direct questioning can be experienced as challenging or intrusive in some cross cultural 
plan  using  a  simple  visual  metaphor  (e.g.  the  tree)  to  explain  the  interaction 
and positive activities in each of four areas (spiritual and cultural; physical; family, 
explain the link between wellbeing and strengths. If exploration of client strengths 
a  simple  visual  metaphor  (e.g.  the  tree)  to  explain  the  interaction  between 
stressors  and  worries  and  uses  a  simple  visual  metaphor  to  explain  the  link 
•  Using  metaphor  (e.g  the  tree)  to  explain/discuss  social  and  emotional 
To what extent do you as the therapist help the client to choose their own goals 
strengths and stressors to a plan for change (a goal). In addition, exploration of 
one  goal,  the  steps  to  change  need  to  include  details  of  how  (the  goal  will  be 
assist in reaching that goal/step)(1). These steps are summarised below: 
•  Linking information about family, strengths and stressors with goal setting 
•  Supporting choice of practical achievable and meaningful goals and steps 
•  Assist to identify practical (what, who, when) steps toward each goal (1) 
•  Using metaphor (e.g. kicking a goal) to explain/discuss goal setting (1) 
The degree of detail of the goal setting is important in the scoring for this item. If 
you  usually,  regularly  and  successfully  develop at  least  one  goal and two  steps 
goals and steps are achievable for your client).   
client to achieve the steps and goals that they are aiming for between sessions?  
The FIRST goal has 3 potential steps toward it – identified by the first thing you can 
do to reach this goal, what else you can do to reach this goal and another thing you 
can do to reach this goal. Each of these steps includes prompts for what you will do, 
She values her link with her country and her language and enjoys going out bush 
He chooses a goal for more exercise because his mate plays footy and he admires 
training together (Tuesday nights).A third step to the more exercise goal is to go 
His second goal is to cut back gunja, his mate can support him. He says the first 
Using the above case scenario fill in the goals section. You have information for two 
goals and 3 steps. See how you go at completing the goals section of the APP using 
Remembering SMART goals, fill in the steps on the APP for the following goals 
creative about what your young client might volunteer as steps) and why the goals 
Fill in the steps on the APP for the following goals 
Answer sheet for goal setting practice  
your first goal?” 
[Client talks about goals]  
“So what else might you do to help meet your goal of …?” 
“Ok so you’ve set some really good goals there.   On this page, there are a few tips 
in tough times or help you with your goals.   
these are the goals you have set for making some changes in your life.”  
[Review goals] 
those goals. Ok?” 
